####################
Cinder configuration
####################

Cinder, the block storage service for OpenStack, supports a
variety of storage backends. This section guides you through setting up Cinder
with different backend technologies, each of which might require specific
configuration steps.

Configure Cinder with multiple backends using the unified
``atmosphere_storage`` variable. See :doc:`storage` for the full
configuration reference. The documentation below explains how to configure
specific backend types.

********
Ceph RBD
********

When using the integrated Ceph cluster provided with Atmosphere, Cinder requires
no additional configuration. The deployment process automatically
configures Cinder to use Ceph as the backend, simplifying setup and integration.

Erasure-coded pools
===================

For environments requiring improved storage efficiency, you can configure Cinder
to use Ceph erasure-coded (EC) pools. EC pools provide better storage utilization
compared to replicated pools, at the cost of slightly higher CPU overhead.

EC pools require two components:

1. A **metadata pool** (replicated) that stores metadata
2. A **data pool** (EC) that stores the actual volume data

To add an EC backend, add a new entry under
``atmosphere_storage.volumes.backends``. The system automatically configures
all required services (Cinder, libvirt, and Ceph Provisioners):

.. code-block:: yaml

    atmosphere_storage:
      volumes:
        backends:
          rbd_ec:
            type: ceph_rbd_ec
            pool: cinder.volumes.ec
            erasure_coded:
              k: 4                       # data chunks
              m: 2                       # coding chunks
              failure_domain: host
              device_class: hdd          # optional: target specific device class
            metadata_replication: 3
            ceph_user: cinder-ec
            secret_uuid: 808c5658-7c46-4818-8f26-82a217e3a57a

.. warning::

    Each erasure-coded backend requires a **dedicated** ``ceph_user`` and a
    **unique** ``secret_uuid``. Generate new UUID's with ``uuidgen``.

The EC pool configuration parameters are:

``k``
  Number of data chunks. Higher values provide better storage efficiency.

``m``
  Number of coding (parity) chunks. Higher values provide better fault tolerance.

``device_class``
  Target specific device types, for example ``hdd``, ``ssd``, or ``nvme``.

``failure_domain``
  Failure domain for data placement, for example ``host``, ``rack``, or ``room``.

For more details on storage configuration, see :doc:`storage`.

***************
Dell PowerStore
***************

To use Dell PowerStore, you'll need to make sure that you
set up the hosts inside of your storage array. You'll also need to make sure
that they're not inside a host group or otherwise individual attachments will
not work.

You can enable the native PowerStore driver for Cinder with the following
configuration inside your Ansible inventory:

.. code-block:: yaml

    atmosphere_storage:
      volumes:
        default: powerstore
        backends:
          powerstore:
            type: powerstore
            san_ip: <FILL IN>
            san_login: <FILL IN>
            san_password: <FILL IN>
            storage_protocol: <FILL IN>  # FC or iSCSI
      backups:
        type: none
      ephemeral:
        type: local

The system automatically configures iSCSI device access, dependencies, and
manifest settings for non-Ceph backends.

For more details on storage configuration, see :doc:`storage`.

************
Pure storage
************

Pure maintains a native Cinder driver that integrates with the
Pure Storage FlashArray. To enable the Pure Storage driver for Cinder, you need
to provide the necessary configuration settings in your Ansible inventory.

To use Pure Storage, you'll need to have the following information
available:

Volume Driver (``volume_driver``)
  Use ``cinder.volume.drivers.pure.PureISCSIDriver`` for iSCSI,
  ``cinder.volume.drivers.pure.PureFCDriver`` for Fibre Channel or
  ``cinder.volume.drivers.pure.PureNVMEDriver`` for NVMe connectivity.

  If using the NVMe driver, specify the ``pure_nvme_transport`` value, which the
  supported values are ``roce`` or ``tcp``.

Pure API Endpoint (``san_ip``)
  The IP address of the Pure Storage array’s management interface or a domain name
  that resolves to that IP address.

Pure API Token (``pure_api_token``)
  A token generated by the Pure Storage array that lets the Cinder driver to
  authenticate with the array.

You can use any other configuration settings that are specific to your needs
by referencing the `Cinder Pure Storage documentation <https://docs.openstack.org/cinder/latest/configuration/block-storage/drivers/pure-storage-driver.html>`_.

.. code-block:: yaml

    atmosphere_storage:
      volumes:
        default: purestorage
        backends:
          purestorage:
            type: pure
            volume_driver: <FILL IN>
            san_ip: <FILL IN>
            pure_api_token: <FILL IN>
      backups:
        type: none
      ephemeral:
        type: local

For more details on storage configuration, see :doc:`storage`.

********
StorPool
********

Using StorPool as a storage backend requires additional configuration for
proper integration. These adjustments include network settings and file system mounts.

Configure Cinder to use StorPool by implementing the following settings:

.. code-block:: yaml

    atmosphere_storage:
      volumes:
        default: storpool
        backends:
          storpool:
            type: storpool
            storpool_template: hybrid-2ssd
      backups:
        type: none
      ephemeral:
        type: local

For more details on storage configuration, see :doc:`storage`.
